---
autotoc: false
---

<slot name="/events/gcc2024/header" />

# Meet the GCC2024 keynote speakers

<table style="width: 100%">
  <tbody>
    <tr class="lead text-left" style="background-color: white">
      <td style="border: 0; width: 20%;">
        <img src="/images/events/gcc2024/jana-klanova.jpg" style="max-height: 200px;" alt="Jana Klánová" />
      </td>
      <td style="border: 0;">
        <strong>Prof. Jana Klánová</strong><br/>
        Talk title: <strong><a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1QlEVKgHtnS-Qx9SMbF3saxOfW6fw0KgW/view" target="_blank">Integrating exposomics into biomedical sciences</a></strong><br/><br/>
        Masaryk University<br/>
        Brno, Czech Republic<br/>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Jana Klánová is a dynamic figure in environmental chemistry, currently serving
as a professor at Masaryk University in Brno, Czech Republic. With a rich
background in mathematics and chemistry, she has established herself as a
leading expert in chemical pollution, environmental health, and
multidisciplinary sciences.

Since 2013, Jana has directed the RECETOX Centre and RECETOX Research
Infrastructure at the Faculty of Science. Her deep knowledge and expertise have
placed her at the forefront of European environmental research. She is the
coordinator of the first European Exposome infrastructure, EIRENE RI, and a
partner in the European partnership program PARC.

Jana is passionate about building exchange partnerships and training programs
across Europe. Her research interests focus on environmental health sciences,
particularly environmental determinants of health. She is a member of the ESFRI
Strategic Working Group on Environment and the Czech national Board on Large
Infrastructures for Research and Innovation. Jana leads the Group of Earth
Observation Initiative GOS4POPs and has been involved in numerous large-scale
projects.

<hr/>

<table style="width: 100%">
  <tbody>
    <tr class="lead text-left" style="background-color: white">
      <td style="border: 0; width: 20%;">
        <img src="/images/events/gcc2024/ute-gunsenheimer.jpg" style="max-height: 200px;" alt="Ute Gunsenheimer" />
      </td>
      <td style="border: 0;">
        <strong>Ute Gunsenheimer</strong><br/>
        Talk title: <strong><a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1HOApRL4Srbx-geQqfy0-8CZBTW9g9Yov/edit#slide=id.p1" target="_blank">Building the EOSC federation and the potential role of Galaxy</a></strong><br/><br/>
        Secretary General<br/>
        EOSC Association<br/>
        Brussels, Belgium<br/>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Ute Gunsenheimer joined the EOSCsecretariat.eu project in June 2021 and assumed
the role of Secretary General in November 2021, overseeing the establishment of
the Association. Previously, she served as Head of External Relations & EU
Projects at the European Spallation Source (ESS) in Lund, Sweden, where she
managed stakeholder relations and grant participations. Earlier in her career,
Ute was the managing director of the International Communications Unit at Media
Consulta International Holding AG in Berlin. She holds a master’s degree in
history and politics.

<hr />

<table style="width: 100%">
  <tbody>
    <tr class="lead text-left" style="background-color: white">
      <td style="border: 0; width: 20%;">
        <img src="/images/events/gcc2024/daria-onichtchouk.jpg" style="max-height: 200px;" alt="Daria Onichtchouk" />
      </td>
      <td style="border: 0;">
        <strong>Dr. Daria Onichtchouk</strong><br/>
        Talk title: <strong><a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1laVWA3r-Xk0A_tQZdgCMMfHV6N0KSi2kbs7_cxkoqac/edit#slide=id.p1" target="_blank">Zebrafish swims into the Galaxy</a></strong><br/><br/>
        Universtity of Freiburg<br/>
        Freiburg, Germany<br/>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Daria Onichtchouk's research centers on the process of gastrulation in
vertebrates, a highly conserved process involving the transition from cellular
pluripotency to early germ layer precursors. Pluripotent cells, initially
capable of differentiating into various cell types, are controlled by
transcription factors. Recent studies in zebrafish, conducted by Daria and her
team, suggest that key transcription factors involved in pluripotency control in
mammalian embryonic stem (ES) cells, such as Pou5f1/Oct4 and members of the
SoxB1 group, play critical roles in coordinating gene expression during
gastrulation.

Daria’s research has shown that many genes targeted by Pou5f1 in zebrafish are
also important in the stem cell circuitry of mammalian ES cell cultures. Daria's
work aims to further understand the evolution and functioning of transcriptional
networks governing pluripotency, utilizing the zebrafish model system.

<hr/>
